#summary What's been done so far.
#labels Phase-Implementation,Featured

= Introduction =

This page explains everything that's been done so far and what problems we have found to the current point.

= Demo =

Since a video is worth a hundred screenshots and a thousand words, we have recorded a short screencast showing some of the features that are already working:

<wiki:video url="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3tcYcTBc0is"/>

= Scat Squeaksource repository =

Found [http://www.squeaksource.com/nscratch.html here].

This repository is meant to hold a package that can be loaded from a 1.2.1 image to get a full-working Scat in it.

Upon loading the project, an automatic installer is fired up and all required files are downloaded and extracted (if missing), namely:
  * Original Scratch Plugins (_[http://code.google.com/p/scat/downloads/detail?name=scratchPlugins.zip download]_)
  * Original Scratch Skins (_[http://download.scratch.mit.edu/source-code/ScratchSkin1.4.zip download]_)
  * Original Scratch Media (_[http://code.google.com/p/scat/downloads/detail?name=Media.zip download]_)
  * Original Scratch Locales (_[http://code.google.com/p/scat/downloads/detail?name=locale.zip download]_)
  * Original Scratch Help (_[http://code.google.com/p/scat/downloads/detail?name=Help.zip download]_)

Additionally, the installer adds all needed instance and class variables to system classes (VariableAdditionReference). The ExtensionsReference page details all methods that are either added to system classes or modified upon loading the project.

The parts of the Scratch project that have been ported are listed below, and the remaining [http://http://code.google.com/p/scat/issues issues] to fix for each item detailed.

  * Basic Morphic GUI
    # Editable text fields lose focus when the mouse pointer leaves them
    # Full screen mode is only working if the Scratch GUI window remains in its original position. This shouldn't pose a problem, as the final app will be full screen. OTOH, when the stage is shown at full screen, stepping stops
  * Substitution of the old dropdown menus for modern ones
    # A few dropdown menus are still broken, but this issue is being looked at and will soon be fixed
  * Top menu generation and unfolding of subitems
  * Block palette and scripting canvas
    # Only a few blocks (sound-related) are not working
  * Image editor
    # Fonts can't be changed
    # Can't type
  * Webcam importing
  * File browser
    # Layout is broken
  * Image file importing
    # GIF images can't be imported
  * Thumbnail generation in the file browser
  * SceneMorph
    # Background of sprites being dragged becomes opaque

= General concerns =

  * In many cases, the Scratch implementation took advantage of old Squeak bugs, like writing into parameters (both method and block parameters), which has been solved by creating local variables that take the value of the parameter, are used as necessary and are returned at the end of the method/block.
  * In other cases, scope bugs were abused, which also had to be fixed by using local variables.
  * Should the final product be an independent package loadable into Pharo or a full Pharo-based image?
  * Note that this project needs to add and modify quite a lot of system methods, mainly from the Morphic package, but also from some other kernel classes, like Number or String. For this reason, it is *strongly recommended* that you install the Scat package in a fresh image, as detailed in the InstallationSteps wiki page.
  * In some cases, instance and class variables had to be added into system classes, which is why we had to extend some class initialization methods as follows:
{{{
    ClassThatNeedsAnExtraInstVar >> initialize
       "If we don't check whether the variable already exists 
        we'll get an error when loading the package for the second time"
       (self instVarNames includes: 'someInstanceVariable') 
            ifFalse: [self addInstVarName: 'someInstanceVariable']
}}}

= Scat Image =

This image is now *obsolete*, as the monticello package has advanced to the point where downloading a full image is pointless. Please refer to the InstallationSteps wiki page for further instructions.

In any case, it's still downloadable [http://code.google.com/p/scat/downloads/detail?name=Pharo.zip&can=2&q= here].